Date: 2024/11/23

## Introduction to Microbiology

Microbiology is purely the study of micro-organisms which includes bacteria, fungi, archaea, and protists. While virus is not considered a true organism, it is often included in the field of medical microbiology due to its ability to infect organisms. Similarly while multicellular parasites is not typically classified in microbiology it is a relevant topic here as well.


## Virus:

**viruses** are the smallest infectious particles (18 - 600 nanometers, with most less than 200 nanometers). Viruses typically contain deoxyribonuleic acid (DNA) or ribonulceic acid (RNA) but not both, and are protected with a protein shell with or without a lipid membrane coating. However, recent studies have shown that other viral-like particles may not contain any detectable nucleic acids (e.g: prions) or can contain both RNA and DNA. 

Viruses are true parasites that requires host cell for replication, and the cells they infect as well as the host response to the infection is what causes the clinical manifestation. Viral infection can lead to rapid replication and destruction or long-term chronic relationship with the host. Some examples includes rabies, Ebola, HIV.

## Bacteria:

**Bacterium (Bacteria)** are unicellular prokaryotics cells (1 - 20 micrometers or larger) that does not contain nulcear membrane, mitochondria, golgi body, or endoplasmic reticulum. The bactieral cell wall is complex consisting of either gram-positive cell wall or gram-negative cell wall. Unlike viruse where a host is required, many bacteria can often survive in a diverse environment and may not require a host. The clinical manifistsantion from bacteria typically results from anormal colonization or toxins.


## Fungi:

**Fungi** are eukaryotic organisms with well defined nucleus, mitochondria, golgi bodies and endoplasmic reticulum. They can either exist in unicellular form (yeast) that replicates asexually or in its filamentous form (mold) that replicates both asexually and sexually. While most fungi can only exist in either form, **dimorphic fungi** exihibit the property to be able to transition between both.

## Parasites:

**Parasites** is the most complex microbes. When we think about parasites, we always think about those visible by naked eye, but in fact parasites includes tiny protozoa as small as 4-5 micrometers to tapeworms that can be measured up to 10 meters in lengths. External parasites like arthropods (e.g: ticks) are also a type of parasite. Parasite is diverse and each has their own unique life cycle and infection mechanism.