

# Sterlization, Disinfection, and Antisepsis:

## Sterlization:
Sterilization is the total destruction of all microbes including the more resilient forms such as bacterial spores, mucobacteria, nonenveloped viruses, and fungi: 

- **Saturated Steam:** this method is often referred to and the standard method and is widely used, inexpensive, nontoxic, and reliable. The 3 important parameters critical for this method includes: time exposure to steam, temperature, and amount of moisture. The most commonly used sterilization cycle is saturated steam heated at 121°C for 15 minutes. For each drop of 1.7°C, and 48% increase in time is required. Under dry heat sterilization, a 160°C must be reach for prolonged exposure which may damage many instruments hence is not the convention.

- **Radiation:** exposure to ultraviolet and ionizing radiation is often another common method used for equipment and are generally inexpensive and effective. 

- **Filteration:** the process of filteration typically involves filtering liquids or air to a HEPA filter with pore size between 0.22 to 0.45 micro meter. This method is effective at filtering out all micro organisms above this size. However, any microbes such as virus under this size will still be able to pass.  

| Method                        | Concentration or Level                        |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| **Physical Sterilants**        |                                               |
| Steam under pressure           | 121° C or 132° C for various time intervals   |
| Filtration                     | 0.22- to 0.45-μm pore size; HEPA filters     |
| Ultraviolet radiation          | Variable exposure to 254-nm wavelength       |
| Ionizing radiation             | Variable exposure to microwave or gamma radiation |
| **Gas Vapor Sterilants**       |                                               |
| Ethylene oxide                 | 450-1200 mg/L at 29° C to 65° C for 2-5 hr    |
| Hydrogen peroxide vapor        | 30% at 55° C to 60° C                        |
| Plasma gas                     | Highly ionized hydrogen peroxide gas        |
| **Chemical Sterilants**        |                                               |
| Peracetic acid                 | 0.2%                                         |
| Glutaraldehyde                 | 2%                                           |
| HEPA                           | High-efficiency particulate air              |


## Disinfection:
Disinfection refers to distruction of most microbes, however those that are more resilient can survive. The term disinfection and sterilization are commonly used interchangable but is different by definition. Disinfection can also be classified into high, intermediate, and low level as well. High level disinfection methods can often be as effective as sterilization, whereas spores generally survives in intermediate level, and many microbes will remain viable when exposed to low level disinfection.

**High Level Disinfectants:** this method is typically used for equipments from non invasive procedures that cannot withstand high heat and pressure. Here are a few examples that are commonly used: **Ethylene Oxide:** this gas is commonly used for the sterilization of temperature or pressure sensitive equipments. The treatment duration is generally 4 hours, and the sterilized item must be aerated for an additional 12 hours to eliminate the toxic gas before using the item. Although ethylene oxide is highly efficient, strict regulations limit its use, because it is flammmable, explosive and caricinogenic. **Hydrogen Peroxide** vapors are effective sterilants because of the oxidizing nature of the gas. A variation is plasma gas sterilization, in which vaporized hydrogen peroxide are exposed to microwave to form reactive free radicals. This method does not produce toxic byproducts hence is commonly used for pressure/temperature sensitive equiupments. However, it cannot be used with materials that absorb hydrogen peroxide or react with it. **Peracetic Acid & Glutaraldehyde:** are to other effective chemical sterilants. Peracetic acid is an oxidizing agent with end products of acetic acid and oxgen. Glutaraldehyde on the other hand is toxic and must be used with caution.

| Method                        | Concentration (Level of Activity)                |
|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Heat                           |                                                  |
| Moist heat                     | 75° C to 100° C for 30 min (high)                |
| Liquid                         |                                                  |
| Glutaraldehyde                 | 2%-3.2% (high)                                  |
| Hydrogen peroxide              | 3%-25% (high)                                   |
| Chlorine compounds             | 100-1000 ppm of free chlorine (high)            |
| Alcohol (ethyl, isopropyl)     | 70%-95% (intermediate)                          |
| Phenolic compounds             | 0.4%-5.0% (intermediate/low)                    |
| Iodophor compounds             | 30-50 ppm of free iodine/L (intermediate)       |
| Quaternary ammonium compounds  | 0.4%-1.6% (low)                                 |


## Antisepsis:
Antisepsis refers to the reduction of the number of microbes on surfaces. There are also a lot of anti-septic agents avaliable. **Alcohols** is perhaps one of the most well known antispetic agent, which has excellent activity against all groups of organisms except spores. However, they evaporate quickly and can be inactivated by organic matters, thus is important to clean the surface before alcohol is applied. Interestingly, the best alcohol concentration for killing bacteria is 70% and not 100% primarily due to the evaporation time. 70% alcohol evaporates much slower than 100% hence are more effective. **Iodophors** are also a common antiseptic that works generally well with most micro organisms. **Chlorhexidine** is another antispetic with a broad anti-microbial activity although it kills organisms at a much slower rate than alcohol but lasts longer. There are more antispetic agents, but application of alcohol, chlorhexidine, and iodophors is a standard practice for skin antiseptic prior to surgery. 

| Antiseptic Agent            | Concentration                        |
|-----------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Alcohol (ethyl, isopropyl)   | 70%-90%                              |
| Iodophors                    | 1-2 mg of free iodine/L; 1%-2% available iodine |
| Chlorhexidine                | 0.5%-4.0%                            |
| Parachlorometaxylenol        | 0.50%-3.75%                          |
| Triclosan                    | 0.3%-2.0%                            |


# Mechanisms of Action Behind These Methods:

## Moist Heat:
Steriliation using boiling water are inefficient because only a relatively low temperature (100°C) can be maintained. Boiling water demonstrate effectiveness in killing organisms, however, the spores remain viable. In constrast, steam under pressures allows higher temperature and can effectively denature microbial protein rendering spores inviable. Note: the rate of killing organism during autocalve process is rapid but influenced by flow rate of the steam, density and size of the load. Hence air pockets may inhibit penetration of the steam and thus effectiveness.

#